TITLE: What I carry in my bag everyday
DATE: 2018-10-19
AUTHOR: John L. Godlee
====================================================================


I’ve recently been getting into the EDC subreddit where people post
photos of what they carry with them everyday, to deal with mundane
everyday things. Inspired, I thought I would write about what I
carry on a normal workday. I cycle to work about 20 minutes across
town. I do most of my work in front of a computer.

  [EDC subreddit]: https://www.reddit.com/r/EDC/

First is the big stuff. I have a Quiksilver backpack. I wish I knew
what model, but I’ve had it so long that the label has come off. I
have my Macbook Pro 13" mid-2014 model which I keep in a felt case
with a pad of A4 lined paper and a charger. I have a basic D-lock
with cable and a helmet for my bike.

[Rucksack, laptop, bike helmet and bike lock]


Then the small stuff. I have a length of cord where I keep my house
and bike keys on keyrings, a 128 gb Samsung USB stick, and a
triangular bin key for dumpster diving. I have some JVC Adjustable
Ear Clip earphones which I really like, I’ve had two pairs so far,
over the course of 6 years. I have a 500 ml metal water flask, a
cotton pouch for small change, a Parker mechanical pencil, an empty
tupperware, a spoon, a wallet clip that I made out of bits of
roofing tin, a basic swiss army knife, and because it’s getting
colder now, lip salve. Additionally, when I emptied out my bag
today, I found a piece of King Alfreds’ Cake, a fungus that is good
for firelighting and carrying embers. It’s very common on the Ash
trees near my parents house, which is where I imagine I picked it
up. I can’t remember when I got it, so it’s probably been in there
for a few years.

  [JVC Adjustable Ear Clip earphones]: https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B003CQE2M6/ref=pe_3187911_189395841_TE_dp_1
  [King Alfreds’ Cake]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Daldinia_concentrica

[Personal items]

