TITLE: Knife wear and tear
DATE: 2018-06-20
AUTHOR: John L. Godlee
====================================================================


I’ve had a Victorinox Swiss army knife since I was about 12, when I
was given one as a present by some relatives who live near Grenoble
in France. It’s a fairly basic model, with a big blade, small blade,
tin opener, bottle opener, awl, and corkscrew. It used to have a
toothpick and a set of tweezers but they are long gone.

I use the knife for nearly everything, it lives in my pocket
everyday, except when I go somewhere where it wouldnt’ be a good
idea to be found with a knife, like an airport. I use it for
chopping food, carving wood, general tasks that require something
sharp. It’s been with me to 4 continents and survived a cumulative
total of 10 months of fieldwork.

The knife has evolved a lot over the time I’ve had it. I was
comparing it to a friend’s knife today and noticed that the repeated
sharpening of the blade on my knife has completely changed its
profile. Instead of having a deep belly, it’s been ground almost
flat, which I find much better for carving wood. I’ve also added a
more distinct point to the end of the blade by grinding off some of
the top of the tip, this makes it more effective for etching designs
and kolrossing. The profile of the blade has also changed, going
from a normal compound bevel to a flat scandi edge, which is better
for carving and much easier to keep sharp.

  [kolrossing]: https://pinewoodforge.com/basics-of-kolrosing/

[Comparison of knife]


[Comparison of blades]


A couple of years back, while in Brazil, the glue on one of the
scales of the knife came loose and fell off. For a long time I left
it like that, as the knife was more compact. But as I started to do
more carving I found it was quite uncomfortable. I shaped a new
scale out of a piece of scrap hazel which I had been using for a
different project. I used a power drill to make little indents where
the rivets fit into the scale and clamped it overnight with come
wood glue. I later engraved it using a friend’s soldering iron with
a herringbone pattern and my initials. It’s much more comfortable to
carve with now.

[Scale blank]


[Scale polished]


[Scale engraved]

