TITLE: Marking laser scanning targets to aid processing
DATE: 2019-07-15
AUTHOR: John L. Godlee
====================================================================


I’ve been processing laser scanner point cloud data I collected with
a Leica HDS6100 phase-shift Terrestrial Laser Scanner (TLS). I’ve
been scanning patches of woodland in southwest Angola and wanted to
generate shadowless 3D models of the woodland canopy. To generate
these models I had to record multiple scans per woodland patch to
eliminate shadows cast by tree trunks. Now I am aligning and
stitching those multiple scans back together again to form a single
3D model in Leica’s Cyclone software. To align the scans I placed
black and white reflective targets (Leica GZT21) in the woodland at
the time of scanning so that multiple targets could be seen in all
scans. These targets are highly reflective and can be easily
recognised in the resulting scan point cloud in the software. The
targets are given names and used to tie the scans together, as the
position of a target won’t change between scans.

  [Leica HDS6100 phase-shift Terrestrial Laser Scanner (TLS)]: https://gef.nerc.ac.uk/equipment/tls/hds6100/hds6100_overview.php
  [Leica’s Cyclone]: https://leica-geosystems.com/en-gb/products/laser-scanners/software/leica-cyclone
  [Leica GZT21]: https://www.sccssurvey.co.uk/leica-gzt21-scanning-target.html

The issue I’ve been having is that it’s not always easy to tell
which target is which on the point cloud. I tried to stick to a
consistent target layout in my circular woodland patch subplots,
with the box for the scanner always places at Target 1, with all the
other targets numbered incrementally in a clockwise direction, like
this:

[Diagram of subplot layout with targets]


This works fine probably about 90% of the time. However, sometimes
if I make a mistake or the vegetation is particularly dense, I can’t
place the targets so that all of them are visible in all the scans.
This leads to confusion in my clockwise sequence and can lead to me
mislabelling a target, resulting in the scans being mis-aligned.
Again, most of these occurrences can be rectified by trying the next
obvious target ID and running the scan registration again, but of
these 10%, about 2% I can’t fix without a major headache. It’s
difficult to understand 3D data on a computer screen and the point
cloud renders on Cyclone aren’t the most beautiful to look at.

[Reflective target]


As I’m planning to take the scanner out again to a different region
of southern African woodland at the end of this year, I have been
thinking about ways I could identify each target in a subplot,
rather than just the first target with the scanner box.

I always have five targets in a subplot. Four around the edge of the
subplot and one in the middle of the subplot. The middle target is
important as I also take manual measurements of tree DBH and species
which originate from this central point, therefore I need to be able
to compare the scanned model to the manual measurements. The first
target has the box, so that doesn’t need to be changed, leaving me
four targets that I would like to identify in some way.

I considered marking the targets with permanent marker on the white
part of the circle, but I will have to see if this permanent marker
can be easily recognised in the scanned point cloud, which is
normally coloured according to an objects reflectance. There is also
a chance that permanent marker might damage the targets in some way,
which I should avoid, as they’re ~£250 each. Leica actually provide
paper target templates as a PDF file in the program files for
Cyclone which can be edited on a computer to show numbers or any
other text, then printed, but these wouldn’t be appropriate for me
because I need to be able to GNSS the targets, meaning they have to
be screwed onto a metal threaded pole.

Another possibility is to hang something off the target, a little
totem that varies in a visible way from the other four. I could keep
these totems in my pocket and just hang them off the target arms
when I go around GNSS-ing them, meaning the targets don’t always
have to be used in the same order, as with the permanent marker
method.

Possible ideas for totems:

1.  Circle

2.  Square

3.  Triangle

4.  Cross

5.  A

6.  B

7.  C

8.  D

If the totem is going to hang off a string it’s important that it
can be recognised regardless of whether it is upside down or back to
front, as it might swing around on the end of the string.
