TITLE: Flow diagram for data cleaning process
DATE: 2020-06-10
AUTHOR: John L. Godlee
====================================================================


I’ve been involved in improving the data cleaning process for the
SEOSAW database. I created an R package with a load of data cleaning
functions and designed a workflow for ingesting new data into the
database. Today I faffed around for a while making a flow diagram to
keep track of all the functions.

  [SEOSAW]: https://seosaw.github.io/

I opted for a nested function design. At the bottom end there are
many functions which do very simple things like check whether a
particular column contains the correct factor levels (e.g. diam()).
These functions are the nested within a function which checks all of
the column contents in a dataset which is to be ingested into the
database (e.g. colValCheck()). At the top there are a small number
of high level functions which perform the checking formatting and
adding new columns all in one (e.g. stemTableGen()). I’m not sure
whether this is overly complicated or not, but to me it seems
reasonably intuitive, made easier with some good documentation. It
also affords the user a lot of flexibility in how they construct
their workflow.

The idea is the diagram will be hosted on the SEOSAW website along
with a vignette and the package manual, as well as on the Bitbucket
repository for the SEOSAW dataset, so that users can use it as a
quick reference when cleaning their own data, either for inclusion
into the SEOSAW database, or for comparing their own data with the
SEOSAW repository.

[]

